---
tags:
  - source/journalArticle
  - zotero
doi: "10.1111/j.1523-1739.2009.01351.x"
itemKey: DZEZCAA4
importDate: 2025-07-04
---
>[!metadata]+
> The Value of Species and the Ethical Foundations of Assisted Colonization
> [[Sandler, Ronald]], 
> [[Conservation Biology (journal)]] (2010)
> biodiversity, assisted colonization, biodiversidad, colonización asistida, ecosystem management, manejo de ecosistemas, valor de las especies, value of species, 
> [Online link](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1523-1739.2009.01351.x), [Zotero Item](zotero://select/library/items/DZEZCAA4), [Local (PDF)](file://C:/Users/aburg/Documents/references/zotero/storage/MDXSRNM2/Sandler2010_ValueSpecies.pdf), 

>[!abstract]-
>Abstract: Discourse around assisted colonization focuses on the ecological risks, costs, and uncertainties associated with the practice, as well as on its technical feasibility and alternative approaches to it. Nevertheless, the ethical underpinnings of the case for assisted colonization are claims about the value of species. A complete discussion of assisted colonization needs to include assessment of these claims. For each type of value that species are thought to possess it is necessary to determine whether it is plausible that species possess the type of value and, if so, to what extent their possessing it justifies assisted colonization. I conducted such an assessment for each of the predominant types of value ascribed to species: ecological, instrumental (including option value), existence, and intrinsic value (including interest-based, objective, and valuer-dependent intrinsic value). The vast majority of species, including several that have been proposed as candidates for assisted colonization, have much less value than is often presumed. Moreover, with respect to some types of value, assisted colonization would not fully preserve the value of the target species even if it were to keep the target species in existence. Therefore, the case for assisted colonization is significantly weaker and more qualified than its advocates often suppose. There may be exceptional species for which assisted colonization is well justified—and for this reason, case-by-case assessment is necessary—but in general the burden of justification generated by the ecological risks associated with assisted colonization is not met by the value potentially preserved by assisted colonization. This suggests that assisted colonization ought to have, at most, a very minor role in the portfolio of ecosystem management practices, even as it pertains to species conservation under conditions of rapid climate change.

%% begin notes %%

### valuer-dependent intrinsic value
>Callicott (1989) describes this type of a value as follows, “\[Species] may not be valuable in themselves but they certainly may be valued for themselves. According to this . . . account, value is, to be sure, humanly conferred, but not necessarily homocentric.” Such valuer-dependent intrinsic value is a distinct type of value from existence value (i.e., the value something has because people have a preference for its existence). Because existence value stems from personal preferences, it is treated (particularly in economics) as expressible in monetary metrics and, thus, substitutable with other preferences. In contrast, according to Callicott (2006), “to accord something intrinsic value . . . is to declare that it should not be subject to pricing of any kind.”
### interpretation of the above
If it is valuer-dependent it is personal, and depends on the context of the valuer. Canis lupus can be valuable to some and not to others, leading to an intrinsic value for someone but not an intrinsic value for the society.
### value of species or organisms (interest-based intrinsic value)
>Nevertheless, the view that species have interest- based intrinsic value is problematic. In most accounts of species, species do not have interests distinct from those of the individual organisms that comprise them. This may seem an implausible claim, given the common parlance of some activity or policy being beneficial (or harmful) to a species. Nevertheless, species (e.g., Canis lupus, Homo sapiens, and Acer saccharinum) fail to satisfy several plausible conditions for having interests, even as the organisms that comprise species (e.g., individual wolves, human beings, and silver maples) do satisfy them.
### intrinsic objective value
>According to Rolston, a species possesses intrinsic objective value because it is a unique and potentially productive evolutionary trajectory. Each species is a distinctive historical form of life that is the product, process, and instrument of creative and generative evolutionary processes (Rolston 1985, 2001).




%% end notes %%

%% Import Date: 2025-07-04T16:57:46.449+02:00 %%
