---
tags:
  - concept/definition
aliases: []
---
 The **species** is a unit of [[taxonomy|taxonomic classification]]. For macrobes, the definition of a species is usually done based on the ability of two organisms to produce a fertile offspring: in that case the two organisms are of the same species. This definition is sometimes challenged for microorganisms, or organisms that reproduce asexually or are prompt to mutations  [[Anthony2023_Enumeratingsoil]].

Species classification is generally challenging: you have to prove that the species does NOT belong to an existing species through specific traits (morphology, genome, anatomy).

See [[von Linné, Carl]] with the concept of [[species]].

[[Anthony2023_Enumeratingsoil]]
> The first main obstacle to synthesizing global biodiversity is understanding the “species” concept across different life forms. Most familiar are the biological and evolutionary species concepts which define species as populations incapable of effectively mating with other groups (13) or as separately evolving lineages with different heritable traits at the population level (14). There are secondary species concepts that better account for all types of organisms using operational methods to distinguish species, including asexually and nonreproducing groups (15). Differences among these concepts are most salient when comparing macrobes to microbes. For example, whereas mammal species diversity is often based on direct observations in the field paired with information on species distributions, traits, and molecular analyses (16), microbial species diversity has been quantified primarily using molecular analyses of DNA hybridization (17), ribosomal RNA gene polymorphism (18), and/or dissimilarity in other regions of the microbial genome (19). Microbial species differences are also blurred by horizontal gene transfer (20) and/or asexual reproduction (21), but operationally, the vast majority of researchers define microbial species based on sequence similarity of ribosomal RNA regions (22–24), enabling a fairly straightforward integration across microbial studies (25). The species concept is even muddier for viruses due to immense ranges in mutation rates, lack of ribosomal and other replication-related protein-encoding genes, and the absence of reproduction (26). Yet, recent work demonstrates that viruses can be organized into isolated groups akin to the biological species concept (26), and overlapping viral RNA and DNA sequences can be used as indicators of taxa much like other microbial ribosomal RNA gene regions (27, 28). However, it is worth noting that the viral species concept is widely debated for myriad reasons (e.g., some viruses lack the ability to recombine genomes, viruses cannot replicate without hosts), and arguably, the viral species concept is most useful for taxonomic purposes (29, 30). Thus, while the species concept may vary considerably across groups, especially between macrobes and various microbes, there are now established methods and sufficient data to synthesize findings using best practices specific to each area of life.